Mindfulness
Many health experts recognize the powerful connection 
between the mind and body. Mindfulness mediation is the 
practice of non-judgmental self-awareness to help improve 
mood and anxiety.

What is Mindfulness?

 Mindfulness is bringing your attention to the present 
 moment with an element of nonjudgment and acceptance. 
 It is noticing when we get caught up in thoughts about 
 the past or the future, and returning our attention to 
 the present — the only reality.
 
While mindfulness can be a formal meditation practice, 
there are also informal ways to practice this skill. 
This can give us perspective and decrease stress.

How to achieve mindfulness?

There are some tips we would like to provide:-

1. Accept Imperfection
Can good be good enough? 
As we gear up for the holidays, 
we often set the bar impossibly high for ourselves and then 
feel upset when our celebrations don’t live up to expectations

Before you start preparing, acknowledge that things may not go 
exactly as planned. It’s OK if it’s not perfect. Imperfection is 
healthy and normal. For some of us, it might just take a little 
practice.

2. Don’t Lose Sight of What Really Counts
With long lines and nasty traffic, the holidays can get hectic. 
When overwhelmed by the hustle and bustle, ask yourself:

Where does this fit in the grand scheme of things? 
If you’re frustrated by the long grocery line you’re standing in, 
remember that it is just a long grocery line — nothing more. 
Don’t let it spoil your afternoon.

Can I use this moment of frustration as an opportunity to reflect? 
While the cashier rings up the customers ahead of you, 
take inventory of the good things that have happened 
today or the things you are grateful for.
Even if this moment seems stressful, can I find a way 
to make it pleasant? Connect with someone else in line 
with a compliment or kind gesture, or notice what’s 
around you with fresh eyes and an open mind.

3. Respond with Kindness
You can’t change how others act during the stresses of the 
holiday season, but you can change how you respond to situations:

Whenever you encounter a difficult person, You tell yourself, 
that this person is suffering, and that’s why they’re acting 
this way. It softens your frustration, helps you to be more 
compassionate and reminds you that it’s not personal.

Keep in mind that the holidays or any import days are 
especially difficult 
for those who are alone. See if you can extend an act of 
kindness to those you know are without family and friends 
during this time of year.
If things do get tense with someone, take a few deep breaths. 
Those few breaths can shift things and give you new perspective.
It may not seem effective at first but after a span of time
ypu may acknowledge those moments of breath relief in you.

How to Do Mindful Meditation?
Mindfulness meditation is a simple, powerful tool that 
anyone can learn. By taking time out of a busy schedule,
a person can focus on paying attention to body position, 
breath and thinking processes. The goal is to reduce stress, ]
feel better and take time to appreciate life every day.

Begin with 10 to 20 minutes of mindfulness meditation per day, 
eventually working up to 40 minutes or longer. 
Starting out using guided audio is very helpful.

We recommend you to focus on breathing and the senses 
— taste, touch, sight, smell and sound — as “anchors.”

“Describe to yourself what’s going on,” 
“This will bring you back to the present moment.”

Ways Mindfulness Can Help Your Health
Research has shown that mindfulness has a positive effect on anxiety, 
depression and pain. It can also improve sleep. 
Here’s how:

In general, our natural response is to push away unpleasant 
experiences, says Gould. However, this often doesn’t work to 
make us feel better or ease anxiety. An alternative is to 
“make space” for negative sensations and accept them in any 
particular moment.

Anxiety. Anxiety involves focuses on “future stories,” which 
can cause distress. Think of these future stories as the 
“what ifs” or fears that run through your mind when you’re quiet. 
“When we feel anxious, our mind is consumed with possibilities, 
but the only reality is what’s here right now. 
Most of our fears don’t happen.”  
You can notice these thoughts and when you come back to the 
present, you can “drop the story,” she says, and lessen the worry.

Depression. While anxiety is future-oriented, depression often 
involves a preoccupation with things that happened in the past. 
As with anxiety, it’s helpful to notice these thoughts and then 
let them go and return to the present.

Pain. “We often add on to pain with our thoughts.” 
For example, when you have a migraine and you dwell 
on how it seems like it will never end, you’re adding 
the mental pain of worry to the physical pain of the 
migraine. Using mindfulness meditation to manage pain 
allows you to be aware of the sensations of pain, allow 
them to exist, even explore them a bit if you can, 
and at any point, you can shift your attention to something 
more pleasant in your body or your surroundings. 
In this sense, you’re making space for the pain while also 
realizing that you don’t have to become overwhelmed by it.

Sleep. Stress reactions, like racing thoughts, keep you from 
falling asleep. Gould recommends a type of mindfulness 
meditation called the body scan, where you notice present 
sensations in the body from head to toe and name to yourself 
in a few words what is present. There’s an expression, 
“If you can name it, you can tame it,” which can ultimately 
help you to relax.

Most of all, don’t be discouraged if mindfulness meditation is 
difficult at first. Like any other discipline, it gets simpler 
with time.

"The more you do, the easier it gets." :)


